# Estimating Shelter Animal Outcomes
## Objective
My project aims to change the way we look at dog adoption and hopefully, give dogs and cats a better chance of finding their forever home. I hope that using machine learning, I can build a pair of models which, provided the information of a dog or cat, will be able to estimate it’s outcome when it enters the shelter and how long it would take for that outcome to occur. This would allow shelter volunteers and employees to better advertise their animals given their approximate outcomes, whether that is for being adopted (finding ways to advertise this dog) or being returned to their owner (checking lost dog forums). It also could be useful for seeing which dogs are less likely to be adopted and hence using other ways to find them a loving home. Knowing how long an animal would stay at the shelter would give the shelter a chance to see how much they could financially invest in an animal or if it is worth sending them to shelter who can afford to look after them for that length of time.
## Method
By creating two classification models and a regression model, using real world shelter data (from Austin Animal Shelter), I hoped to build accurate models which could predict an animals outcome. One classification model placed each animal into either a positive outcome (which involved being adopted, fostered or returned to their owner) or a negative outcome (being transferred elsewhere or euthanised). The other model tried to predict if an animal would have any of the five outcomes above. Both models used SVM classification. The regression model attempted to use the data to see how long an animal would be staying at the shelter. It had to be non-linear, as the numerical data points did not have any correlation and hence, I used random forest regression to do this.
## Conclusion
I learned that the 2 outcome classification model was very strong, giving high accuracy and recall scores which are very important given the context (recall being important as we do not want an adoptable animal being labelled as unadoptable). The 5 outcome classification on the other hand, although on first glance, the accuracy score appeared relatively high, the classification report showed a different story. Adoption had high precision and recall scores, next being foster and finally euthanasia (which luckily had low recall meaning a dog that should be euthanised has inaccurately been shown as adoptable, giving a dog a second chance). The issue is that return to owner had zero recall and one precision, meaning all dogs who are predicted to be returned to their owner are likely inaccurate. And finally, transfer which had zero on both precision and accuracy meaning that if an animal is predicted to be transferred, it is highly likely to be inaccurate. Hence 5 outcome only works if adoption and foster is given (hence it may be useful to split whether an animal would be adopted or fostered). Finally, due to the non-linearity of the data, it was much more difficult to build an accurate model for time spent in the shelter. The best model I could fit with my current knowledge could only provide a 0.30 R^2 value, and hence was still not accurate enough for use. 
Although my models were not perfect, they still provided me with new knowledge of data science techniques and an appreciation for human psychology. I have learned that people are very difficult to predict. Especially a person’s relationship with animals. People tend to choose their pet based on their lifestyle or the way it looks, what may be unadoptable to one will be another person’s future best friend. It is only a matter of time before that person walks through the door.
## How would I improve this project in the future
In the future, I would like to learn how to use neural networks and deep learning to see if that would work better than a regression model for modelling the non-linear data. I would also like to be able to get more data from other animal shelters, in an attempt to improve my model and even branch out into other types of animal than just dogs and cats. Getting hold of new features could also help make my models stronger, for example, level of training. Upsampling could improve my model as a vast majority of the datapoints are adoption.
